It seemed that there was nowhere to swim.
In front, the Dnieper stopped in an unexpected bay, surrounded on the right, left and just green-yellow pre-dawn shores. But the steamer suddenly turned, and a long, calm strip of river stretched farther to the barely visible hills on the horizon.
Stepan stood near the railing on the deck, involuntarily diving into the distance, and the measured blows of the blades of the steamer wheel, the deaf captain's words near the horn took away the strength of his thoughts. They, too, stopped in the misty distance where the river disappeared unnoticed, as if the horizon was the last frontier of his aspirations. The boy looked slowly along the nearby shores and was a little embarrassed - at the turn to the right there was a village, hidden behind the meadow. The August sun washed the dirt from the white huts, networked the black paths that drove into the field and disappeared somewhere, turning blue like a river. And it seemed that the vanished path, connecting with the sky in the boundless plain, returned to the village by another branch, carrying to it the absorbed space. And the third way, rolling down to the river, took the freshness of the Dnieper to the village. It slept in the middle of a sunny day, and the secret was in this dream among the elements that fed it with their power. Here, by the shore, the village seemed a specific work of space, a magical flower of earth, sky and water.
His village, the one that Stepan had left, also stood on the shore, and now he was unconsciously looking for kinship between his own and this village, which happened to him on a long journey. And he joyfully felt that this kinship existed and that in these houses, as well as in his abandoned ones, he would go as the owner. He watched with pity as it melted, moving away from every movement of the cars, and a streak of ugly smoke hid it completely. Then Stepan sighed. Maybe it was the last village he saw in front of the city.
He felt in his soul a vague excitement and nausea, as if he had left in his village and for all that he saw, not only the past but also hope. Closing his eyes, he succumbed to the sorrow that shook his soul.
When he stretched from the handrails, he saw Nadezhda around him. He did not hear her approach, and rejoiced, though he did not call her. He took her hand quietly. She shuddered, not raising her head, looking at the fan-shaped wave that drove the steamer with its nose.